The event loop is a core mechanism in JavaScript that enables non-blocking, asynchronous programming despite JavaScript being a single-threaded language. It continuously monitors the call stack and various queues to ensure smooth and responsive application performance by coordinating the execution of code. 
Key Components of the Event Loop
The event loop works in tandem with several components of the JavaScript runtime environment (e.g., the web browser or Node.js): 
Call Stack: A Last-In, First-Out (LIFO) data structure where synchronous code is executed immediately. When a function is called, it's pushed onto the stack, and when it returns, it's popped off.
Web APIs (Host Environment APIs): These are non-JavaScript threads provided by the browser (like setTimeout, fetch, DOM events) or Node.js APIs (file system I/O) that handle time-consuming operations in the background.
Microtask Queue: A queue that holds high-priority callbacks, primarily from Promises (.then(), .catch(), .finally(), async/await).
Macrotask Queue (Task Queue/Callback Queue): A queue that holds lower-priority callbacks from tasks like setTimeout, setInterval, and user interaction events (e.g., click). 
How the Event Loop Works
The event loop's job is to ensure the call stack is empty of synchronous code before pushing any queued tasks onto it for execution. 
The process follows a specific order in each "tick" (iteration) of the loop: 
Synchronous Code Execution: All synchronous code runs first and is managed by the call stack.
Web API Offloading: When the JavaScript engine encounters an asynchronous operation (like a setTimeout or fetch request), it hands it off to the relevant Web API to be processed in the background.
Completion and Queuing: Once the asynchronous operation in the Web API is complete, its callback function is moved to either the microtask or macrotask queue.
Draining the Microtask Queue: After the call stack is empty, the event loop prioritizes the microtask queue and executes all tasks within it before moving on.
Rendering (Browser Only): The browser may perform rendering updates (like layout and painting) after the microtask queue is drained.
Executing One Macrotask: The event loop then takes only one task from the macrotask queue and pushes it onto the call stack for execution.
Repeat: The loop then repeats the entire process, checking for new microtasks before the next macrotask. 
Example Execution Order
Consider this code snippet:
```javascript
console.log("Start");

setTimeout(() => {
  console.log("Timeout Callback");
}, 0);

Promise.resolve().then(() => {
  console.log("Promise Callback (Microtask)");
});

console.log("End");
```

```The output will be:
Start
End
Promise Callback (Microtask)
Timeout Callback
```
This order occurs because the synchronous console.log statements run first, followed by the higher-priority microtask queue (the promise), and finally the lower-priority macrotask queue (the setTimeout callback). 
